[Music]
welcome to mind body yoga my name is
Moren Spencer and I am your yoga
instructor and Hostess of the show would
like to welcome you to participate in
this 30 minute program that will
introduce you to what's called ha yoga
very simple basic form of stretching and
holding exercises that will give you
increased flexibility increased
circulation and increased strength in
your muscles it will also work your
bones in the sense we're going to be
doing some handstand kind of positions
that we compact the bones and what we do
in ha the yoga is to use the body like a
gym rather than go and lift the weights
up we use our body to lift the weights
up so in the yoga the science of yoga
which was codified back about 6,000
years ago actually developed in India
it's a system of Health that includes
the physical the mental the emotional
and spiritual health so when we talk
about the physical the body is your
temple for your soul so this is
something that's going to hold the
spirit or what we call Prana The Prana
energy in other cultures they call it
Kei or Chi we call it life force or Life
Energy Universal Life Energy everybody
has sort of their um maybe name to it
and within their culture and a lot of
religions are based around the Holy
Spirit and spiritual energy statues you
might see with white energy coming out
of their fingers or Halos around statues
that represent uh glows glows of white
light and that's essentially what we are
about 90% water gelled together to make
this organic thing called your temple
and in that Temple generates energy it's
who you are it's your personality it's
your whole Essence so if you're a very
positive loving person you will put out
a very loving positive field but space
around you that others will sense people
will be very comfortable to come into
your field to want to be with with you
and recognize the fact that you seem to
have some kind of internal energy or
power about you uh that's maybe just a
bit unspoken just as a presence the
other hand people that are tired and
exhausted and fatigued and irritable and
angry and eventually end up being very
hostile and maybe in some situations get
violent and abusive are people that just
hold in all that energy and that's going
to damage the temple the Temple's not
going to be fill with loving energy it's
going to be a very negative presence you
also will have a field around you that
will be that type of feel there are
times you walk up to somebody and know
that you should just maybe move away a
little bit a sign of danger and there
about two foot two feet out of your body
what's called your space can be a very
negative tense type of a feeli what yoga
helps us is to keep Balan there are
times all of us go through life in which
we're going to get into a more negative
mode because we're tired or we haven't
eaten and and we haven't thought of our
spiritual sense and connection to a
higher power source and we get a little
low the batteries get low so yoga is
just one technique that introduces you
to this concept of bringing in energy
replacing the trapped energy that would
call negative energy and letting it come
out through exhalation through your
breath other types of techniques that
work this kind of energy field are in
China it's called Tai Chi and chong
chong is the meditation practice that
they do in order to generate the energy
Within and the taia those movements
fluid movements of working the energy
fields and moving your balance of your
body um each culture sort of has this
kind of a sense of uh the movement of
the energy field and the exchange of the
oxygen so what we're doing today is one
of the techniques called ha yoga going
to start with some of the breathing
techniques how do we get this energy in
well we bring it in through what called
pranama the pr pranama breathing
exercise this is how we get Prana in so
in India they call it Prana that's the
name the Sanskrit word for this energy
that exists within the oxygen and what
research has shown actually machines
electrom magnetic fields can go up and
find that they are positive and negative
within the air nodes of energy and the
key point is is to come bring in the
positive and let out the negative keep
yourself balanced so we do that by the
prama breathing exercise with deep
breaths we're going to start with what
call complete breaths and we're going to
push the stomach out when we inhale
inhale through your nose bring it down
deep to the base of your lungs collect
all the negative stuff and in your mind
think I'm letting this go I'm getting
out of me all that holding on all those
emotions and Tra stressful energy that
you've kept in maybe from all day long
or for years that you've kept in stuffed
emotions very effective breathing
exercise to get stop you to connect with
that and get rid of some of that excess
energy going to close your eyes you're
sitting in this cross- leg position
called the Lotus half Lotus is if you
bring your leg up this way but just for
the sake of beginners and being kind of
in a basic pose just keep your legs down
on the floor kind of an Indian like
position hands are on your knees you're
going to close your eyes keep your spine
straight and inhale through your nose
and draw the breath down deep to the
base of your lungs by pushing your
stomach
out hold your breath for a count of
three now we're going to Exhale and
bring the stomach in let that air come
out through the
nose again inhale stomach comes
[Music]
out chest comes up hold the
breath and we going to Exhale bring the
stomach in it's coming out through the
nose chest comes down let all that
excess energy come out one
more and
exhale now if I had a measurement of
your pulse your blood pressure prior to
starting and after you just did that
you'll see a difference you'll see see a
lowering in the blood pressure a
lowering your vulse your skin would
start to relax your lactate levels would
come down that are generating the
muscles muscle tension stats to get
released just by shutting the shutters
and going down so we go from beta waves
to Alpha slowing down the brain waves
and if you go into a meditative State
you go down to Theta and into Delta very
deep sleep at that healing stage that
very low energy feel so now we're going
to do is another set of breathing
exercises called the cleansing breath
going to bring our hands together under
our chin lift the elbows up inhale
through the
nose hold your breath now exhale through
the
mouth cleanse it out
[Music]
inhale and
again bring your hands back down on your
knees lift your arms up and grab the
energy of Life inhale exhale down
pushing down in the chest the rib cage
inhale
out these are exercises because we're
working the lungs the muscles that make
our lungs inflate they're just like
balloons and they have to have that air
brought brought in drawn in through the
diaphragm and through the ribs through
the chest hands together in front inhale
arms go out to the side expand the chest
inhale and exhale
[Music]
out
and the last one is called alternate
nostril breathing and this is to balance
the right and the left side of the brain
the right side of the brain deals with
creativity intuition spirituality
emotions all that kind of right domain
when we think of the right domain
thinking all people right left right
sided person the left-sided quote person
is somebody who's into intellect logic
reasoning sees things very black and
white very very straightforward so this
is where the balance comes in you can
call it liberalism and conservatism
positive and negative right and left
male female energy males tend to be
considered more left-sided with that
logic and reasoning women tend to be
much more into the emotional and the
intuition and spirituality domains we
are both and that's the key thing is to
keep yourself centered you want to pull
from all parts of your body this
technique is very effective if you have
a job that activates mostly the left or
or your mother or somebody who's a
counselor who's working always the right
you want to keep things balanced by
placing your fingers up two fingers up
at your six chakra the middle of your
forehead you're going to block off the
right nostril and inhale through the
left now you block off the left and
exhale through the
right inhale through the
right exhale through the
left inhale through the left
left and exhale through the
right and then a complete breath bring
the energy back
in So through the sinuses and through
the nervous system there's the
stimulation the air is still going to go
down into your lungs but there's this
extra stimulation we get when we do that
kind of a exercise that alternate
nostril breathing now we want to stretch
out the upper part of our body okay the
neck area you're going to place your
hands on your knees and you're going to
pull down in the elbows as you drop your
head keep your spine straight and it's
called the neck stretch want to stretch
out the back of your neck a lot of
tension builds up in the neck area from
the kinds of work you might do or
driving cars or holding kids that really
pull you down to the Earth and create
this hyper extension that starts to get
very tired so pull down and release the
energy through your breath keep
breathing and release chin comes up and
pull down on the chest pull down on the
shoulders and the elbows
let it out just exhale out the stress
that builds up all underneath
here and release head over to the right
and pull on the
left and release head over to the left
and pull on the right I've talked in
other shows about the big difference
between smiling and frowning when you
smile it takes just seven muscles but
when you frown there are 48 muscles
involved with frowning or negative sort
of emotional and uh facial features 48
muscles but if you walk around smiling
all the time and you're only using seven
and your body will believe you're happy
release drop your head down that's
something you might have to be reminded
of have other people remind you just to
smile and so that activates more
positive response now we're going to do
the neck roll let your head roll to the
back exhale to the back inhale to the
left and exhale
forward inhale to the left
exhale to the
back inhale to the side nice and slow
just feel the release of that tension
that builds up in the neck
area and take a deep
breath the next one's called vibration
and vibration is to to build up and
strengthen the pectoralis muscles and
the arm muscles the deltoids and biceps
and also in this area here through the
wrist area you're going to place your
hands together get the elbows up and
push as high as you can till they
vibrate
okay keep going short breaths while
you're doing it keep vibrating and you
will feel those muscles all tensed all
through the chest keep pushing and
release quick and just shake out your
hands now we want to stretch out
hyperextend this area of the body which
gets lot of times a lot of tension from
being cramped from different activities
that we might do holding on to things or
the computer keyboards place your hands
behind you behind your back fingertips
pointed to the back squeeze the shoulder
blades together chest comes full forward
but the head goes
back and just send the energy up and
down your
arms a lot of this really feels good so
many people tell me when they do the
yoga oh I just feel like I'm waking up
like my body's just finally just
releasing trapped energy that's been
sitting there for a long time now we're
getting ready to go into what are called
the ASAS the ASAS that's a Sanskrit word
that means poses and these positions
were named after animals and insects as
I go along you'll be hearing things like
the bottom fly which is what we're going
to do next or we'll do a cat or a
forward- facing dog they're all series
that're named after animals or insects
the yogis back 6,000 years ago had the
comfort and the joy of observation they
sit on mountains and watch nature they
watch what all the animals did and what
bark they ate and trees and berries they
stayed away from they watched their
movements how they flew and how
movements move through them and so
that's why a lot of them are named after
these animals and insects so it makes a
little easier sometimes to remember the
butterfly is not going to be flying like
this because you don't want to pump the
muscles up we're stretching and
releasing so you get it to this position
as best you can even though your legs
may be very tight and you'll be like
this but eventually it will let go
you're going to
inhale and exhale coming down let out
the excess energy you're releasing in
your back and in your middle thighs and
come down and drop your head and
breathe I do a very shallow breathing
because my lungs can only fill out up in
the Epal loes my diaphragm is up pushing
so just very shallow but good deep
breaths inhale coming up grab onto your
toes bow and arrow left leg comes out
and if you have to keep your knee bent
that's okay you always modify it's your
body don't worry about competing or
thinking you have to do everything the
instructor does it's your body you
listen to your true self what your
body's telling you through your pain
where the tightness is and where you may
have to work a little hard to get the
area of your body to stretch out bring
the left foot into the grind bring the
right one out to the side and we're
going to do what's called alternate leg
pull one leg at a time and what happens
with the alterate leg pull with sitting
straight forward we're going to turn to
twist the back and we're going to be
stretching the hamstrings so you're
going to place your hands together
inhale coming up turn to the right and
come down as far as you can grab onto
your ankle don't worry about getting all
the way down out now pull your chest
down to your knee and then the last
thing you do is drop your head onto your
knee and start rubbing that hamstring so
trying to stretch and
pull the back muscles and release the
tension in your legs inhale coming up
nice and slow this is what helps to
build the muscles and strengthen them in
the back left hand goes on the floor and
lift like you're waking up and lift the
body and stretch and bring that energy
from the tip of your fingers down to
your
toes and come down nice and slow over
the other side you always want to keep
your energy fied nice nice and quiet not
be moving too with too much effort go to
the left and stretch it
out yoga really feels good once you get
yourself flexible it just takes about a
good six months of doing it before
things start to actually get to this
point that they're really stretched out
you'll notice the difference within a
month of doing yoga if you do it every
week with us if you join the show every
Wednesday and just make this your yoga
class and stretch out for a half hour
you'll see a difference in your life the
more you do it can always tape the show
and then do it every day just a half
hour everybody can find that in their
life just a little bit of time to
actually take care of the body remember
this is your temple for that energy so
you want that energy to Flow full leg
pull so we're going to open the legs and
this is to strengthen the lower back
we're going to be coming forward and
hold this isn't to get yourself flopped
down on the ground a lot of my students
might be gymnast or previous ballerinas
and got this wonderful loose energy all
through the hips the key thing here is
to hold yourself up so that you working
against gravity inhale coming up come
forward and now hold and work that back
muscle energy up and down the spine so
with intent when you have intent and you
intently send energy somewhere that's a
big difference than just mindlessly just
going into a position and not think
about what you're doing that's why I
call this mind body yoga I want you to
connect your mind with your body have
this Union which is what yoga represents
the union of Mind and Body now stretch
it out to the left
and stretch it over to the
right back to Center inhale coming up
and bring arms down we're going to bring
our legs together I'm just going to turn
this way so you can see this better the
next one's called the
plane going to bring your hands together
make sure you're sitting up straight
arms come straight up release hands go
behind you fingertips are pointing to
the back Point your toes and you're
going to lift head goes back now this
throws weight up and down that those
arms compacts the bones so what you want
to do is just get the benefit of
preventing osteoporosis to calcium
leaving your bones compact them lift
your body up this is like lifting
weights rather than lifting it this way
we're lifting it this way to get all
that calcium stay minerals to stay in
those bones the next one's called the
boat and this is a balance we're going
to balance on our butter so you're going
to lean back and grab onto your feet
your ankles lean back and get your
balance now if you roll back that's okay
as you start to come up because usually
this will throw the balance off come up
very slow and of course it depends on
what your hamstrings are doing if you
have really high tight hamstrings you
may not be able to get all the way up
but eventually you will as you develop
that flexibility they're like elastic
bands eventually they'll have memory and
they'll be able to go back to that
stretch that you had previously now legs
back out again we're going into head to
knee
pose okay head down towards the knee but
what we're going to do is modify this a
little bit as we come down grab onto the
ankles and bend the knees okay we're
going to Forfeit the hamstrings for now
to get this good lower back stretch and
just bend yourself
forward Lift Your Head Up release that
tension this is very heavy the head and
you're going to drop the right leg and
place your head on the left knee rub the
right
hamstring release the other
side
now both legs straight
out come down grab onto your ankles and
get down as far as you can
bre again very short breaths because
that diaphragm is
up and come back
up okay now we're going to roll over and
work on the
ankles so we're going to sit back on the
ankles and stretch them out we're
stretching out the
quadriceps hands together lift inhale
lean your head back and hold release the
lower back let that lower back
stretch and
release now the other way on the toes
this may hurt because usually if they
cramped into shoes they get very very
tight the joints you want to have every
joint including the knuckles of your
fingers and your feet fluid energy
moving always moving through it so
that's what a lot of these are they're
painful but just let it go with the
breath
just keep breathing and send the energy
down to those toes to release that
energy and
release next one's called the ultimate
body stretch and the ultimate body
stretch is to release energy all through
the pelvis and abdominal area you're
going to open your legs and grab onto
your ankles and very slowly lower
yourself down you may not be able to go
all the way down and don't ever force it
if you just sat up like this and so I
can do that and flipped yourself down
and your were ready to do it you could
rip and tear ligaments and things in
your knees so always be very gentle and
kind to your body listen to it there's
no need to jar it or to push it and
force it always listen to the pain and
that pain is a message so we sit back
and if this feels okay and you don't
feel like it's really excruciating you
come down to one elbow and if that feels
all right go to the other elbow that
feels all right then you can go all the
way down arms up over your head and
stretch and take nice deep breaths and
breathe energy up and down from the
knees all the way up to your
hands a wonderful release the ultimate
body stretch just feel everything just
release all through this area that's
usually very
jammed come up and now we going to go
into What's called the cat cat's a very
simple and very powerful one to do every
morning if you can just remember that
after you brush your teeth and you wash
your face and clean yourself up think
about scrubbing the joints and getting
some energy to flow through the upper
part of the body by tipping the heart
upside down and getting blood to your
brain and get energy coming through the
wrist and through the shoulders and
through the hips get on your hands and
knees okay your arms are straight down
from the shoulders you going to lift
your head up and you're going to lower
the stomach so you're going to have this
lower back it's going to have an arch in
it inhale draw the energy and now bend
your elbows a little bit drop your head
tip the heart upside down and exhale
bring your stomach up
inhale
and
exhale
inhale and
exhale and
exhale great very simple to do but very
powerful when you wake up in the morning
you have all those stiff joints from all
the immune complexes the immune system
works all night long to clean you up
while you're sleeping it's not reacting
to stress
and getting involved in your daily
activities of of life that can have a
lot of stress component to it and the
immune system is involved with the
stress response there's research that
shown that some of these cells our
immune cells actually have receptors and
actually can manufacture or receive
neuropeptides and these are produced by
the brain chemicals in the brain that
make your body response to stress so the
more stressed you are what you're doing
is activating your immune system for the
stress respon and not letting it do what
it should be doing take taking care of
cancer cells taking care of viruses and
bacteria often people get run down and
they get the flu they get sick it's
because they were having too much stress
on the on the system and the immune
system just can't handle it so at night
all this work is going on when you're
sleeping at night and that's what you
feel when you wake up in the morning
you're so stiff and you want to move all
that energy around just a simple little
one that you can do next one is a
balance called the right leg right arm
right leg comes out right arm comes up
next to your ear and just try to
balance okay it might be a little Wiggly
at first but eventually that will get
nice and strong bend the leg reach
back and this is called the half bow and
you
lift release drop yourself down lift
that leg
up and now we stretch it behind us into
What's called the forward- facing dog
dogs stretch like this in the morning
they stretch out release the energy
through the Cyro iliac joint through the
root chakra the base of your spine all
the stress that builds up in the lower
pelvis going to bring your head up
you're going to bring the right leg
forward into what's called The Warrior
okay we have the
warrior and we're going to lean
back release lunge forward very gently
and slowly come
forward bring your hands on the insides
to the floor and drop yourself down
exhale inhale coming up exhale going
down to sit on the left heel stretch the
hamstring again drop your head down lift
your head
up next side so we're going to repeat
just that same pattern
first the Y and the leg the
bow stretching things up lift strengthen
the
back stretch it out behind you
to the
warrior make sure you have your balance
before you lean back
release
down yoga should be very fluid once you
get good at it just a wonderful feeling
to just release all that energy through
the breath and work from one Opa to the
other now we're going to talk and take a
little rest called the child's pose
going to drop ourselves down Palms are
facing up head on the floor and just
release the
shoulders grab onto the heels top of the
head on the floor and push forward this
called the rabbit you're pushing and
trying to stretch and release energy in
the upper back and back down arms above
your head the shoulder stretch watch
your
fingertips walk them out and drop your
head and just move the fluid through the
shoulders up and down
down lift your head up toes into the
floor straighten out your body and bring
it down very
gently this um bothers your lower back
just drop your knees down if not keep
your body out this also builds up the
arms it's like a hand stand position you
keep that body up now drop down use your
arms to come down leave your arms there
and going into the Cobra like a snake
we're going to inhale push with your
hands lift one vertebrae at a Time come
up and breathe up and down the
spine exhale
coming roll run up back into What's
called the resting
pose so get our legs turned out to the
side and Palms are facing
up and now get the heart rate down
whenever you do a back bend or you're
pushing up into the Cobra your heart
starts pumping so in yoga always get
back centered again don't let yourself
get out of
control same principle in daily life if
you're finding that you're having too
much stress just stop to deep breathe go
into a resting pose and you'll get the
heart rate down okay we're going to do a
hip stretch bring your right knee in
stretch it up and rotate it let's get
the fluid moving through the hips
exchange that
fluid left side
this is the lower energy in the chakras
the chakra system that I've talked about
earlier seven different batteries
through the body that relate to
different areas and feed energy into
those areas we just rotating getting all
this energy
moving bring both knees in arms out to
the side waist roll legs go to the left
and your head to the right with that
nice oblique Twist on the back inhale as
you cross the other side it's a
wonderful stretch for the back
cross
cross almost getting to the end of the
program just a few more legs come
straight up hands behind your head this
is for stomach stomach pull right leg
comes in lower the left leg down we're
going to use this leg as a weight to
pull on that stomach switch so this side
of the muscles is being tense and pulled
now switch exhale as you go down
inhale coming in exhale going
up and down into resting pose
again just let your body
relax and now I'm going to come
up very
slowly and I'm going to finish by just a
description of the chakras I've been
talking about the chakras and if you
missed some of the earlier shows you may
not understand what I'm talking about
but there are seven batteries human
batteries in our body that have been
actually through instruments shown that
there's this collection of energy that's
in these areas of the body the root
chakra is the base of your spine the
color is red fight oflight response you
think of a bull we always put that red
charge up and that's your calini that
comes out second chakra is in the
abdomen third is in the stomach fourth
in the chest fifth in the throat sixth
in the middle leing forehead and the
crown chakra at the top of your head so
we have red orange yellow blue green
Indigo and white and it's like your
color of the rainbows if you have
beautiful energy as I talked about
earlier and a beautiful glow of space
around you you'll be a loving rainbow if
you have too much red and you're angry
and hostile you'll put that out have a
red field if you're too emotional be too
much of that in your field so the key to
yoga is to have a balanced chakra system
and what we've just done in the 30
minutes is to balance that energy get
your back in help and we hope you'll
join us next week and mind body yoga and
we'll just end with some pranama
breathing let's close your eyes and go
into your deep
[Music]
breathing